i hope you all enjoyed the talk
as a
student in the school of public health i
thought it was very interesting in how
it talks about rethinking medical
treatment focusing more on the root
cause of disease as opposed to
reactionary treatments with pills and
things like that
i think it's important for the audience
to get a little bit more perspective on
your gentleman i look forward to our
conversation and then we're going to
have a brief q and a at the end
but just so that you all know nataraj
did research at amgen before joining pwc
andre's company
is well familiar at the cellular and
molecular level they do genetic
sequencing of cancer
and you may or may not know that
professor wilson did quite a bit of
research with blood flow in computer
simulation
while at stanford
and i think it's also important to note
for the audience if you're not aware
you know two big topics in the in the
talk there were
cancer and arthritis and he classified
them as degenerative
diseases but they could also easily be
classified as chronic diseases
and what some may not know is that 50
percent of the us population has at
least one chronic disease and those
people account for eighty percent of the
health care spending in the us which i
think is important for business school
students to know
and i was wondering if you gentlemen had
any thoughts
as to interesting treatments or
different thought patterns that you're
seeing around those chronic diseases or
others that are out there
we'll start you you're close to
something sounds good um
so it's interesting for me to hear that
talk
just because i'm kind of i guess
part of the old
way of thinking about this in a way so i
spent just like george said a number of
years at amgen working in drug discovery
for oncology
very much in that kind of lock and key
hypothesis
and i think that you know having spent
some time at anderson and then lately in
some of the work that i've been doing i
think i've kind of kind of come a little
bit
closer to what the speaker is talking
about which is sort of more outcome
focused
um and i think that you know
the medical community as a whole is sort
of starting to think about this and you
know even in terms of reimbursements now
everything is sort of outcome focused
and so i i think there's definitely
a strong push and then there's a lot of
value in in recognizing that there are
alternative ways
to impact
patient
diseases outside of just the traditional
drug therapies
i think that
drug companies actually are also kind of
getting on board in a lot of ways and we
can talk through this in a little bit
more detail but as we work with our
clients i think
they are are starting to try to find
ways to engage
with patients so that there's trying to
build this sort of you know the speaker
talked about immersion and so try to
build this sort of community
um you know using either social networks
or gamification things of that nature
so um so to answer the question um i
think that
definitely
you know this this is a holistic way of
thinking about therapy outside of just
the drug aspect of it um you know i
think that this is starting to sort of
become the
the norm if you will uh even even within
pharma clients
well i have a comment i'll try to i'll
try to be brief there's so much to say
um
first of all we got into what we do at
our company because the fundamental
premise is that if you find disease
earlier
you could probably do something about it
it's as simple as that there's the lock
and key we're down the street from amgen
many of our people worked in the
traditional pharma
environment which has actually made a
tremendous amount of progress in the
last few years but it was clear that if
everything starts with a five millimeter
tumor the cancer is already present
wherever that is and then it spreads and
people die of metastatic disease and
there was very little that was actually
in place either as a system or as a tool
for doctors to use to interrupt this
process
so when um
uh dr markuj's book came out a couple
years ago we read that actually a lot of
people at amgen all the doctors that we
were dealing with read that and were
completely taken aback by what he was
saying but we looked even further and
there were examples going back to
the 1860s in australia of doctors
postulating that the blood system or the
lymphatic system was responsible for the
spread of disease so a lot of those
ideas had been thought about for a long
time what we've done is put that into
practice what i think is interesting
about the the talk here that i hadn't
seen i'd only read the book a couple
years ago is he's taking it much further
into the the systemic environment and i
happen to believe that the stimulation
of the immune system that is coming
there's been fantastic progress in
melanoma in traditional pharma but it's
clear that that applies pretty much to
everything else and if they can
eliminate some of the toxicity issues
that are associated with the drugs today
that will
be in our opinion the way to
overcome what is today considered
chronic disease or often an intractable
disease
i'll stop there because i know you're
going for two hours sorry
it's fine um you know i the area that i
have more knowledge in because i don't
work at the you know kind of small scale
is at the macroscopic scale and computer
modeling and there definitely has been a
sea change
and tremendous opportunity in bringing
in high-end computing
into the clinic the company that i
co-founded a few years ago
uh just got fda approval for the first
use of computer modeling and blood flow
in a diagnostic that i'm aware of and so
you know i think that the
and that's all the things that you guys
know obviously you know you're carrying
around a cell phone that has more
computing power than the best computers
in the world you know 15 years ago
and i think the the data point i can
remember from my phd research was around
2000 we got a 5 million dollar
sgi supercomputer at stanford
that was in the top 500 computers in the
world at the time
and i was one of the first people to get
an account on it when we were testing it
out and i think probably five years
later i would i was able to put together
a compute cluster for about 25 000 my
office of standard pcs that had
comparable performance for the kind of
modeling that i was doing and i think
that that has a profound impact in what
you can do
uh both you know at the
bringing the scale down
but also the the computing needs uh the
biology and modeling of the you know the
human system is very complex
so it's if you think the history of
computer modeling in general goes back
probably to at least the 50s for
structural design very simple
bridges and trust kind of members and
things like that so i think that's an
area where um and i just reviewed a
paper a few days ago for people trying
to do that for intracranial
aneurysms so i think that there's a
there's definitely
opportunity
that we're seeing that was impossible
literally impossible
uh 15 years ago both from the research
side because we had more modeling to
understand but secondarily just the
computing change so i think that's one
area that is is like i said it's you
know a little more macroscopic than what
these guys deal with but it's kind of my
perspective i'd like to build on those
comments because i do think it's
interesting to talk about the
technological advances that are
happening in medicine right now and
uh they talked in the talk about you
know new models and metaphors but so
much of these different thought patterns
talk about genetic sequencing really
can't happen without appropriate
technological capabilities and i'd be
interested to hear how
how you've gone about your work has
changed or improved as a result of new
technolo technological capabilities
coming on board
so maybe i'll start and then we'll just
just go the same way
um really exciting crowd so
so i think so again going back to some
of the work that i've been doing um
within pharma and then again now working
with larger sort of
outside of just the pharma working with
larger sort of academic health clients
and things
one thing that i always struggled with
when i worked in at amg and doing the
drug discovery piece was so i think it's
important to recognize that cancer is
really isn't one disease it's really
kind of like a group of diseases i'm
sure under you can speak to this at
length
um and and i'm not just referring to the
different kinds of cancer even within so
most of my work was in non-small cell
lung cancer and even within that there
are so many different
kinds of mutations and tumor subtypes
that
i think that's that's part of of the
learning that we've developed probably
in like the last decade and and a lot of
that really is still kind of being
unraveled there's large projects
that are funded by the nih and the nci
around mapping the cancer atlas to try
to identify all the mutations so that
you can identify
what therapies work for what subset of
patients and so i think you know
in in those sorts of areas there's
there's been a a large
um
growth in the ability to use these
different computing models that
professor wilson was
was mentioning so for example one of our
clients is a large academic health
center and they're using ibm watson
to to try to identify what some of those
to essentially map out the
aspects of the cancer genome but also
some of the
the way oncologists treat cancer is sort
of like tribal knowledge they you know
they have a little notebook they make
notes
and and they're constantly experimenting
to try to figure out what works and what
doesn't
um and i think utilizing some of these
uh computing methodologies you can try
and draw associations between some of
that tribal knowledge as well as
learnings from the cancer genome and
make those associations really easily to
try to
potentially improve patient therapy so
so that's that's one very sort of
concrete area where and i think it's an
emerging area where uh we're definitely
seeing a lot of
gains i would say
well i'll echo that
i started life as a programmer so i view
what we do in cancer is threat detection
anyway it's just a different form
everything that we do and have done over
the last seven years has been because of
sequencing so
and then everything that's downstream of
sequencing we happen to use blood
because it's more dynamic but you know
we'll look at tissue we'll look at
anything else
and i think like everything every other
cycle technology is years ahead of
practice because it has to prove itself
it has to show that it's safe that their
outcomes are positive and then it has to
be economically viable it has to make
its way into the standard of care you
know doctors have to learn about it so
we're just at the beginning of this
particular phase right now however it's
going very quickly
every week there's a discovery every day
there's a discovery there are papers all
the time and i'm not a doctor but
everybody tells me that there is more
going on every month in terms of
discovery than everything that has come
before which i think is pretty pretty
surprising and so i'm
i'm very bored by that and i'll give you
one example of what that means in
practice there was a doctor here at ucla
there is a doctor here at ucla just a
few months ago treating a
prostate cancer patient who was
originally diagnosed in 2007 cancer had
come back he was doing very poorly not
responding to any of the traditional
treatments for
prostate cancer including radiation
we ran a sequence of his blood and we
found a mutation that's normally
associated with melanoma or at least it
had only ever been written about in the
context of of melanoma so this is a v601
and if you were looking at a patient
with the traditional you know what we
know about prostate cancer today he
never would have been treated and he
would have died but with this discovery
there was enough evidence to
prescribe vemma raphael but targeted
therapy and he had a complete response
and he's back in vegas running his five
restaurants that's a doctor right here
on campus
so this is an example now targeted
therapy is not the panacea i think
immunotherapy will be the big sea change
but targeted therapy does work when you
are able to find this much evidence and
turn off that gene it's a bit of a lock
and key approach
that's only possible through sequencing
and that technology altogether is maybe
less than five years old although people
have been working on it for tens of
years but what i'm talking about is a
viable technology we're a small company
we buy sequencers that cost fifty
thousand dollars each or a hundred
thousand dollars each and we can afford
to put a bank of them in
if the machine cost ten million dollars
a copy
maybe amgen could have a couple in the
research department but it would never
make its way into a viable use a doctor
at ucla could never afford to run that
type of test and the software
programmers necessary to code the
machine would be very hard to come by
they would have to know about biology as
well as programming as well as a lot of
other things so we're in a
completely new era right now
completely uh uh
you know very much spurred on by what's
happened uh through the sequencing of
the human genome and all the companies
that are translating that into
affordable equipment
yeah the big the big technology i
mentioned computing which is the obvious
one for the world that i was in but the
second one that
is much more
specific to medicine is medical imaging
i don't think people totally grasp how
much medical imaging has improved
even in the last 10 years
and if you think about the fact that the
ct was invented
an mri probably in the early i think
believe in the early 70s if i remember
correctly but even for about a decade
after that it was mostly kind of a
you know research tool
um pretty crude and so what i mentioned
about the company i started before that
is doing uh diagnostics for coronary
arteries so those arteries that feed
blood to the to the heart
uh that imaging modality was
also impossible in 2000 you know i mean
maybe research oriented people were
doing some of that but you couldn't get
the image resolution
even a decade ago to make that a a
tractable practical problem because
these are small vessels that are
diseased that are on a moving heart i
mean it's a pretty amazing
we look at so i think the
the two big technologies in the space
that i worked in explicitly in my
research in the area that i'm familiar
with computing but also medical imaging
and i think the interesting side about
one of the things that was in some of
the email chain that we
discussed uh before today's talk for the
panel was around economics and you know
i think we we talk about the great side
of medicine um and the improvements and
i think it is phenomenally better i mean
there's just no question myself having a
couple chronic diseases the treatment
that i get today is much better than i
got as a kid 20 years ago i mean it's
just you know there's there's no
comparison
um
in my mind but you know you know the
thing i would think of say like what
what happens
when
i talk about the greatness of medical
imaging but that adds tremendous expense
and also in the case of uh vascular
disease means that we're finding all
sorts of small aneurysms aneurysms are a
growth in the vessel where the vessel
wall has weakened and you know your pipe
has expanded and has risk of rupture and
so we're finding a lot of things with
this advent of imaging that we didn't
know were there
15 or 20 years ago and so now we've got
ethical questions about how do we you
know what are we going to do about
treating these you know millions of
people that have a
asymptomatic condition
uh do we treat those people with a one
percent rupture risk for example so so i
think that's one of the interesting
things about the technology advance is
how it
um you know the ethical and cost
combinations that you have in common
yeah if i can speak out of sequence here
because they're
even you know to respond to what you're
saying so if we're looking at blood and
we're talking about cancer and you know
we see a lot of other things obviously
and there's plenty of work going on that
environment that dr mukherjee is talking
about that that that environment that
can avoid disease or or alter what's
going on there's a you know field of
methylation fantastic studies going on
in methylation because we can look so
deep into the cells right now
and direct links are being shown to
nutrition so it is possible that the
younger people
through exercise nutrition etc have a
you can describe a very real link to
avoid the onset of certain diseases that
for example my generation is used to
just accepting you know you get that
okay let's look for the locking key and
you know
let's see how well we can do so we're
just there
this is all going on in the research
institutions the technology of the
fundamental tools the ideas are being
put into practice and i really don't
think it's another 20 or 30 years in
this context i really i think it's very
short term
and when you talk about something like
nutrition um you know i i think it's
such a relatively easier treatment
option as opposed to a targeted gene
therapy
and um you know i i'm interested we talk
so often at the business school about
scaling ideas or scaling businesses and
i know not to raj and you work with pwc
you've done some international work and
on the global health scale
andre i know you're considering some
international
opportunities for your own business i'd
be interested to hear
any any of your own thoughts as to what
excites you about your own work or work
around chronic diseases in terms of
scaling them to populations that don't
have access to the type of technology
that we have here in the u.s
i can start again
um so yeah so i probably spent about
my last six to eight months uh working
with a
non-profit foundation that funds a lot
of
product development
uh type research uh mainly for the
developing world so they're not really
focused on so it's a little bit of a
tangent if you will but they're not
focused on cancer or
osteoporosis or osteoarthritis they're
focused on you know things like malaria
and tb and aids
um
and one of the questions that they have
had
um is how do the how how can we value
um
the impact that an intervention would
have in these different disease areas so
in the commercial world um a lot of
times the the valuation of a certain
uh impact is really in terms of the you
know the market size the market
opportunity things of that nature so you
know roi is is you know in some sort of
dollar related measure
and for the foundation obviously there's
it's not necessarily a dollar measure
because they're not expecting a return
in that sense
and so we've been helping them think
through how they can um
what is that return on their investment
and in in i think that you know in a
very simplistic sense i think there's
you know so in the public health world
obviously some of some of you who have
public health backgrounds there's things
um such as uh
dalys and qualities which are the
disability adjusted life here so for
every disease you know so for example if
you were to get malaria you could
calculate how that would shorten your
lifespan and that would essentially be
sort of a rough estimate of the number
of years of life you lose due to
disability um and so you i think it's
sort of a simpler level than that the
way that we are thinking about it is
is for them to be able to value their
interventions in terms of impact which
is is this impact on reducing
these number of life years lost to
disability or improving quality of life
but also in terms of cost and in terms
of risk
and you know i think this is similar to
what pharma does in a lot of ways but i
think it's it's kind of an interesting
way
to look into markets where there isn't
that huge profit potential so i think
you know things like nutrition is is
where
um those are some ways in terms of
impact of of nutritional interventions
uh to be able to say you know if if you
have patients that have uh good
nutritional
supplements for example they're less
likely to get these diseases and then
essentially those
those gains can be measured more in
terms of productivity gains rather than
dollars so so that's some of the work
that we've been doing i think it's it's
relatively uh
novel in the sense of no one else has
necessarily thought through it in these
terms
and so i think that's something that in
my work recently that i've been quite
excited about
well in my world it's um it's very much
about survival so
it's very cancer oriented and everything
we're doing is to try to find it earlier
and earlier and earlier so we work in
breast cancer a lot
but instead of waiting for a her2 type
of tumor or triple negative patient to
have a problem we now look at
breast cancer stem cells come back to
ucla one of them was discovered here on
campus we've been testing that for a few
months so we could probably
everybody's familiar with brac analysis
and things that angelina jolie has
talked about publicly but it may be
possible to actually have the next step
come right after that because there's no
observational method for a
bracket-mutated family
so that's sort of here in the united
states in europe um
if you i think everybody in the room's
probably been touched with cancer you
know the effect on the families you know
it's devastating so our simple goal is
to eradicate it to avoid it you know
just avoid the onset of disease
outside of the states you know you're
right we're setting up labs in asia
there are programs that are different
than the ones we find here in china for
example there's a program to manage 250
million elderly
people
it's very interesting because it does
get into osteoporosis gets into a whole
bunch of other conditions but
the idea of testing them regularly
and then modifying some of their
behavior is there it's ingrained it's a
program it's funded so we are setting up
a lab to do that the lab happens to be
in a cancer center that treats 500 000
people a year but 500 000 people here
but that's sort of tangential they have
programs like that that we have not been
able to find here in the states and
we're we think that's quite compelling
yeah you know i um i i guess maybe um if
it's okay to be skeptical of a ted talk
i'm i'm not confident everybody's gonna
eat healthy and drink less and quit
smoking in the future so i think the the
beauty of the cardiovascular disease
world is that largely that's a patient
population
um
the people that are going to see
vascular surgeons for example usually in
their 60s that have all sorts of
comorbidities and you know you have
large populations of smokers people with
poor diets poor exercise regimes that
you
wheel out of the hospital after their
surgery so they can smoke in the parking
lot um there's not smoke in the building
so you know i guess i i tend to think of
solving the problems after they've
you know you know after they appeared
but i'm i'm uh i'm i'm if you guys can
get people to live healthier
i'm sure everybody in this room had a
really healthy dinner last night
uh so
as i was drinking my cup of coffee
earlier
well i think part of it too is
so i completely agree with that i think
part of it though is and this is not so
much in the us but outside of the u.s is
having access to those healthy meals and
having access to that high nutritional
value i think that's that's where some
of the disconnects are and so even if
so i think behavior change is harder but
providing access is a little bit easier
and so you know maybe
two meals a day or two meals a week are
healthier than there would normally be
is something better than i think yeah
and i think some of it has to be taken
out of the abstract you know here in the
states i'm sure around the world
metabolic syndrome is how people
referred to that trifecta you know
coronary disease high blood pressure etc
you know
supposed to ask anybody here so what are
you going to do about your metabolic
syndrome you know i don't know my doctor
asked me what are you going to do your
pre-metabolic syndrome like oh well i
should exercise you know
it's the locking key approach we have to
maybe
come up with a way to discuss these
problems in a in an actionable manner
that somebody can can really do
something about it
i think to some degree they're very
esoterically described
in medical circles but they're not yet
brought into the the to the public in a
way that they can do something except
not eat and not smoke right there has to
be something more than that and there
will not be a pill for it
on the topic of changing
uh
actions and behaviors and thought
patterns
not by design we don't have a physician
here on this panel and dr mukherjee is
one
i'm
wondering what your experience has been
dealing with physicians and do you think
this is a tangible goal in terms of
training
physician training
to
more instinctively look at the root
cause of disease as opposed to a more
reactionary kind of treatment pattern
and on top of that how have you seen
your interactions with physicians change
over the years in your various business
interactions
yeah i mean i to answer the question i
think it is definitely something that
is
to in my interaction with physicians
what is always in the forefront of their
mind is is outcomes and so i think in
that regard
it's it's definitely something that
i think they already think in those
lines and so
i don't think it would be huge behavior
change now having said that
i think a hurdle would be
in terms of how this is
institutionalized you know so how is
this kind of brought about as a standard
of care
and so i think you know and and dr
mukherjee alluded to that as well you
know in terms of how can an immersion
environment be patented or you know how
could that be sort of consistently
deployed in multiple settings
um so i think i think that that remains
an open question but um the the one
thing that i've uh noticed in my
interaction with physicians is they hate
being tied down they hate being tied
down to like one thing
um and so i think in that regard um it's
you know having options is something
that you know not just physicians all of
us like it obviously but i think
physicians definitely want for them to
have the ability to be able to
administer care in whatever way that
they would want
and so i think that in that regard this
is this kind of message is something
that i think that they would welcome
uh yeah so really a two-part answer this
this systemic bottom-up view that you
described or that dr mukherjee described
i think that's alive and well outside of
the states that i find a lot of
different countries approach it that way
we seem to have more of the you know
treat the chronic disease with a 300 000
drug they don't have them they don't do
it
having said that here in the states i
think the doctor is in a very difficult
position
they are outcome driven but at the same
time they have to follow a series
guidelines that are just very specific
if this happens do this if that happens
do this and if they go outside of those
guidelines you know it's it's it's not
easy they do but it's not easy
and they have to be data driven they
need to see the data that comes from
trials that shows that you know this
works or you know the risks are
tolerable and a lot of those trials have
not started yet let alone been completed
so they're in a
in a gray area and they rely on their
experience and thousands of hours of
having seen patients and and that's fine
but it's it's difficult for them to
adopt right now then of course there's
the the institution and reimbursement
and all the stuff that follows but right
up front at the coalface they're in this
very difficult situation
um
but we found generally the reception is
there you know because it's not you know
if you do something that's not dangerous
for the patient
and can be proven you know
with a program or an algorithm that's
not subjective you know whatever i feel
or whatever he feels today then then
they will adopt
but it's a multi-year cycle and the
trials are missing
you know i i would say i haven't
necessarily seen a change in the
physicians that i've interacted with
over the
last 15 years i think you end up with
really two camps of people and maybe
this is true for people outside of
medicine as well but you have people
that are willing to think about new
things
to
that are always looking to do things
better and then you have a series of
people that are very much looking to
follow the standard of care and and then
i think if you look at the way medicine
is taught i don't know how the the
instruction of medicine has changed but
you know they're basically trained to
memorize things and follow float you
know decision trees and
and do the same thing uh based if you
present with
10 symptoms they do x y and z so you
know i think that in my case you know we
definitely from a research perspective
you have to find the right people to
work with not all clinicians are built
the same because there are plenty of
people out there that just
you know don't
you know i don't want to say not
intellectually curious because that
might not be right but i just think that
they believe that the best way to treat
their patients is to do the best you
know the standard of care and you know
do the best they can at that point and
and you know kind of move on so
uh from a research perspective and i'm
assuming that's the same true for my
fellow panelists you know it's really
important to find the right people to
work with
that have that you know perspective
and you know do want to try and do new
things and think outside the box it's
you know really really hard to do
i want to thank thank the audience for
taking the time to listen to our
discussion and right now we're going to
open up the floor to any questions you
may have for some of our panelists if
you just raise your hand there are a
couple folks with some microphones here
right here
hi um my name is kenny i'm a graduate
from the school of public health and my
question is about personalized medicine
so as genetic testing becomes more
mainstream and we're kind of more aware
of biomarkers for different diseases
you know of course we met the human
genome we're mapping the human brain
so i think it has a great potential for
changing um the landscape of patient
care of course it will change the
landscape for
pears and
providers as well so any thoughts you
have on the subject i would be very
curious to hear them thank you
are we going in order um sure i can go
first um
so uh i have a little bit of personal
experience with it in the sense that one
of the programs that i led at amgen was
targeted towards a specific
mutation for
non-small cell lung cancer and we were
developing the drug therapy along with a
companion diagnostic
i definitely think again i mentioned
earlier so just because of the
heterogeneity of tumors i think
you know as long as we stay in the
current paradigm that porcelain medicine
starts to take on more of an importance
and you know for those of us who watch
the state of union address president
obama actually mentioned
um parts of it there was a
a person i think in the audience as well
who had been treated for a specific
sort of
mutation cancer mutation and he's kicked
off i think it's a
either a quarter of a billion or a half
billion dollar
initiative called the
precision medicine initiative
i think part of what we are seeing in my
current role is is how is is around sort
of knowledge sharing
around personalized medicine
so i think
there are currently there are it feels
like lots of approaches
where individual players are kind of all
playing separately and i think that
having a role for a consortium of source
a consortium approach will be important
so nci i think is trying to play that
kind of role but having that sort of
sharing i mean obviously it gets
challenging when you've got um drug
development campaigns and there's lots
of ip involved but
i think that will that will be sort of
an important
kind of part going forward
but you know certainly mapping out the
cancer genome this cancer atlas project
et cetera should certainly help in
trying to identify uh what some of these
mutations are
yeah that's all like what nature says i
mean it has to happen just has to happen
uh the patient i was describing earlier
right here at ucla would have died
without that test and you know so cancer
you know the heterogeneity is the word
everybody's using means it's made up of
a lot of different things it's not it's
not homogeneous but it's also dynamic it
mutates it changes every day
every week
as a function of the drugs people are
given as a function of the environment
of other things that happen and breast
cancer could be as easy as getting
knocked in the subway you know things
change so to not measure that
and not customize whatever treatment is
being given
for me is insane you know you wouldn't
build this auditorium just by measuring
the foundation then build the whole
thing and measure it afterwards hey you
know is it straight did it work no you
have to measure all the time
so
that is within the concept of
personalized medicine
um and that it for me it's a condition
synoquinone of just continuing in in the
modern world it has to happen and the
technology is there to do it
yeah the work that we were doing in fact
the part of the reason they approved the
non-invasive
uh coronary test that my previous
company was doing was the fact that it
really is around personalized medicine
you could do statistics based models and
saying based on
your age and something else you know
this might be your risk of of this
progressing but really being able to
build a model of somebody's actual
anatomy in our case and simulate their
actual blood flow or you know as close
as you can approximate it
lets you personalize it and that's the
whole was the whole point of our
previous company so
uh the one that's so you know i think
there is a
a tremendous role for it um i mean it
does have the the
secondary downside effect of that you
know blockbuster drugs might be harder
to do right well that's exactly yeah not
to pick on the trash or have a general
big fire don't have any affiliation
damage anymore that is you know the lock
and key approach that was described in
the video it doesn't work for
many many many people
and
you know it's a it's a tough bargain you
get on a treatment and you know the days
are ticking down especially lung cancer
or something like that well it didn't
work they already know it doesn't work
in 35 45 50 of the people
but that's the standard of care so we
keep administering that so there has to
be a dynamic measurement of the the
tumor progression in that particular
patient as a function of how that
patient is responding and if there are
resistance mutations that emerge the
doctor can catch them early change that
therapy has to be ultimately we're going
to get towards immunotherapy but we
still have a few years to go
for now targeted therapy is the best
thing there is it's very promising in
certain cases it's not the cure-all for
everybody i mean out of all the genes
over 20 000 genes there's maybe 15-20
targeted therapies i mean that's the
state of the art
so something else is going to have to
come but it will be based on taking a
look at that that
that patient dynamically yeah
any other questions
back there
yeah hi my name is brian an mba student
so i have a question on personalized
medicine that kind of follows what
you're talking about how do you make it
economically feasible when the patient
subsets that you're treating go down so
dramatically at the same time when drug
development cost is ballooning has gone
to over two billion dollars a year i
just i mean it doesn't seem like that
equation works out and i don't
understand how you can make that
efficient without the government you
know bearing cost well you know i'll
maybe i'll start since i'm you know on
the side of the side of the room the uh
i think one of the things that's was
missing in in the talk today is we
talked about and although we've talked a
lot about the change in the physician
perspective
um but
i
and this maybe falls in the realm of
personal opinion but hopefully it's
driven by some data i think there needs
to be
um a change in the societal view and
they will our willingness to accept risk
you know i mean one of the problems we
have particularly in the u.s
with the fda regulations is this very
burdensome
you know lack of willingness to have
you know needing huge study sides and
huge costs that you mentioned
the solution to that one solution to
that is to have society if we really
want personalized medicine be willing to
reduce because the patient size will be
smaller there will be these
you know more specialized treatments you
have to bring the cost down
to do that so i would argue that if you
have a willingness in in society to
accept more risk
then you can have more personalized
medicine if you don't have a sea change
in the way people perceive
you know
testing in in the medical space i don't
know what the solution to the problem is
maybe some other people in the panel how
to solve it but my my claim is it it
requires it isn't just doctors who need
to rethink the you know healthcare right
it's it's
it's everybody it's all of society in my
opinion
so i mean i'll echo that and you know i
i guess one thing i will mention is that
at least in the oncology space you know
i think for the most part pharma
companies have
accepted that
um this is sort of the new reality
and i think they've sort of focused in
and so even in some of these
personalized medicine markets there are
the markets could still be relatively
large if you see that the patients that
are failing the first and second line
therapies that patient population can
still be relatively large so i think
from from a farmer perspective i think
what it comes down to is is two things
one is controlling costs just like
professor wilson said but i think in
some ways it's actually easier to do
in
a personalized medicine context because
you're going after a
specific segment of the population so in
a traditional
sort of
clinical trial you would test it with a
really large population because
a significant percentage of the
population is going to be non-responders
just because
they have a mutation to that particular
tumor and so by going after a specific
tumor population the hope is that you
would have a significantly higher number
of responders so your total sample size
doesn't need to be quite as large so so
that's that's the one point the other
one is to show the value right so i
think this is really a key so
it's to demonstrate the value of that
therapy um in terms of the the number of
years of life added uh for example so
even though it may be
you know uh you know maybe a few
thousand patients or 10 000 patients i
think the the companies really need to
do a better job of demonstrating what
that value is you know if you can cure
the cancer and you can give that person
back 40 years of productive life you
know that that's something that could
potentially warrant the price tag that
they were attached to those drugs so i
think that's those are the two ways to
think about it
i'll add a couple of comments i
obviously agree with with the panelists
here so
um
a few years ago we were in massachusetts
we had to do a clinical trial with a
pharmaceutical company
and it was a small investigational trial
six patients
fair enough
the pharma company sent their i.t people
over the people that deal with the
informatics and the database they put in
place was an oracle database cost 750
thousand dollars
i looked at that and i thought well you
know it's kind of a lot of money
we're self-funded you know we could do
this with an excel spreadsheet nope
nope that's not that's not part of our
process this is you know so to your
question about drug development the i i
think all the pharma companies have been
struggling with how to make their
development more efficient and it's it's
a problem we've seen a lot of that
unfold in the newspapers
there is the question that the whole
model of the blockbuster drug is is
going away
and not just because there are generics
but because
giving somebody a month or two months in
in dire conditions at the end of their
life is probably not enough value and
increasingly people are opting away from
that
and i'll just leave you with one notion
this concept of personalized medicine is
about as much of not drugging people as
giving people the right medicine
most patients that we talk to don't want
to take drugs that's actually what
motivates them they don't want the chemo
they don't want whatever and they want
to make sure that
they have the data to make that decision
ultimately though we're going to have to
rethink the cost benefit and the
complete development within within the
american pharmaceutical
model
in my opinion yeah i mean i think if you
look at the statistics and just in
particular in medical devices and things
like that
and maybe the government needs to have a
bigger role i don't know but there's
been a decrease and andre might be able
to comment on this because he's out
there you know fighting fires but
there's certainly been a significant
decrease
in venture capital flowing into a lot of
medical technology so
you know i think there is some question
marks uh about how this is going to get
how the innovation is going to get
funded going forward because you know
it's a different funding environment
for at least medical devices
than what it was 10 or 15 years ago
and you know there's certainly some new
initiatives uh from the nih for example
where they're
um doing some bridge funding for some of
their what's called small business
innovation research grants to actually
get stuff into clinical trials because
basically just sort of a death valley
people aren't willing to take the risk
uh you know it's a lot it's a lot better
you get a lot better return on your
capital if you're investing in snapchat
than uh you know a drug that may you
know has a one in ten thousand chance of
succeeding in ten years
yeah i would also say sorry one more
comment along with the development the r
d that happens on the biology side all
this complexity there's a um there's a
legal aspect in ip law and everything
that surrounds the way we do things in
this country that is have needs to
change
and outside of the states they're
already rejecting it even brand new
drugs that have been on the market for
less than five years other countries are
saying we're not paying for it thank you
very much
um and and the whole reimbursement
paradigm is shifting has to shift
because we pay for everything here in
the country in the us
in europe the single-payer systems the
governments already say okay i'll pay
you one-tenth of that and then as you
move east uh you know that that
one-tenth becomes one percent but the
cost is born here by the north american
market
that is going to require the government
to negotiate with
drug companies
and we don't do that today and i'm not
i'm not sure if everybody knows that but
we are paying the brunt that hundred
thousand dollar drug over here cost five
thousand draw five thousand dollars in
another country and that difference is
made up and i don't think i'm speaking
out of school here i'll just say the
drug companies in general make all their
money in the states a little bit in
europe and the rest they give away okay
that that can that doesn't work
this is going to cost us 20 of our gdp
and not too many years i think the
prediction is in six more years that's
just unsustainable
and you can't buy an oracle database for
750 000
to track six patients you know that's
just not right
if you developed everything that way our
cars would be half a million dollars you
know a piece anyway
that's it we have time left for one more
question and a couple comments do you
still have a question here
my name is victoria first year thanks
for coming here um i was curious i read
a report about doctors using modified
hiv and other viruses to target cancer
cells i just kind of want to get your
feedback on x it seems like it has they
were getting tremendous results from it
so
me or you uh why don't you go first all
right so
so that's actually uh you know that's
not new using target viruses or bacteria
to insert something in a cell is uh it's
been done for a long time
immunotherapy is actually right at that
stage
the the bacteria or virus that is used
to insert that or stimulate that t cell
and and and manipulate it
may be toxic at some point they're not
sure they're working on that toxicity
once they have that solved you're going
to see this uh you're going to see the
field explode
so i view it all as a sort of the tox
issue and the pharma companies are
extremely that's where they they have
the competencies to deal with that and
that's exactly what they're dealing with
now
now i'll just add to that so i think
there's a couple candidates that are
already
i want to say like later stage clinical
trials so we should be seeing um we
should have some sense you know in the
next five years or so on how well that
works but definitely that is you know
sort of the sort of the holy grail at
least for the near term
if you will because you get away from
these very toxic uh drugs that we're
using right now because essentially the
the drugs that we use right now sort of
target everything which is why you have
all of these you know side effects
related to cancer therapy so being more
targeted in that way is is is the kind
of holy grail
we're now out of time uh thanks very
much for your questions thanks for
joining us today i hope you guys check
out some other ted talks during the week
and please join me in thanking our
panelists today thank you